In English the word ‘love’ often refers to ‘something that I like.’ For
example, ‘I love sticky rice,’ ‘I love sweet mango.’ We really mean we
like it. Liking is being attached to something such as food which we
really like or enjoy eating. We don’t love it. Mettā means you love your
enemy; it doesn’t mean you like your enemy. If somebody wants to kill
you and you say, ‘I like them,’ that is silly! But we can love them,
meaning that we can refrain from unpleasant thoughts and vindictiveness,
from any desire to hurt them or annihilate them. Even though you might
not like them – they are miserable, wretched people – you can still be
kind, generous and charitable towards them. If some drunk came into this
room who was foul and disgusting, ugly and diseased, and there was
nothing one could be attracted to in him – to say, ‘I like this man’
would be ridiculous. But one could love him, not dwell in aversion, not
be caught up in reactions to his unpleasantness. That’s what we mean by
mettā.

Sometimes there are things one doesn’t like about oneself, but mettā
means not being caught up in the thoughts we have, the attitudes, the
problems, the thoughts and feelings of the mind. So it becomes an
immediate practice of being very mindful. To be mindful means to have
mettā towards the fear in your mind, or the anger, or the jealousy.
Mettā means not creating problems around existing conditions, allowing
them to fade away, to cease. For example, when fear comes up in your
mind, you can have mettā for the fear – meaning that you don’t build up
aversion to it, you can just accept its presence and allow it to cease.

You can also minimise the fear by recognising that it is the same kind
of fear that everyone has, that animals have. It’s not my fear, it’s not
a person’s, it’s an impersonal fear. We begin to have compassion for
other beings when we understand the suffering involved in reacting to
fear in our own lives – the pain, the physical pain of being kicked,
when somebody kicks you. That kind of pain is exactly the same kind of
pain that a dog feels when he’s being kicked, so you can have mettā for
the pain, meaning a kindness and a patience of not dwelling in aversion.
We can work with mettā internally, with all our emotional problems: you
think, ‘I want to get rid of it, it’s terrible.’ That’s a lack of mettā
for yourself, isn’t it? Recognise the desire-to-get-rid-of! Don’t dwell
in aversion for existing emotional conditions. You don’t have to pretend
to feel approval of your faults. You don’t think, ‘I like my faults.’
Some people are foolish enough to say, ‘My faults make me interesting.
I’m a fascinating personality because of my weaknesses.’ Mettā is not
conditioning yourself to believe that you like something that you don’t
like at all, it is just not dwelling in aversion. It’s easy to feel
mettā towards something you like – pretty little children, good looking
people, pleasant mannered people, little puppies, beautiful flowers – we
can feel mettā for ourselves when we’re feeling good: ‘I am feeling
happy with myself now.’ When things are going well it’s easy to feel
kind towards that which is good and pretty and beautiful. At this point
we can get lost. Mettā isn’t just good wishes, lovely sentiments,
high-minded thoughts, it’s always very practical.

If you’re being very idealistic, and you hate someone, then you feel, ‘I
shouldn’t hate anyone. Buddhists should have mettā for all living
beings. I should love everybody. If I’m a good Buddhist then I should
like everybody.’ All that comes from impractical idealism. Have mettā
for the aversion you feel, for the pettiness of the mind, the jealousy,
envy – meaning peacefully co-existing, not creating problems, not making
it difficult nor creating problems out of the difficulties that arise in
life, within our minds and bodies.

In London, I used to get very upset when travelling on the underground.
I used to hate it, those horrible underground stations with ghastly
advertising posters and great crowds of people on those dingy, grotty
trains which roar along the tunnels. I used to feel a total lack of
mettā. I used to feel so averse to it all, then I decided to practise
being patient and kind while travelling on the London Underground. Then
I began to really enjoy it, rather than dwelling in resentment. I began
to feel kindly towards the people there. The aversion and the
complaining all disappeared – totally.

When you feel aversion towards somebody, you can notice the tendency to
start adding to it, ‘He did this and he did that, and he’s this way and
he shouldn’t be that way.’ Then when you really like somebody, ‘He can
do this and he can do that. He’s good and kind.’ But if someone says,
‘That person’s really bad!’ you feel angry. If you hate somebody and
someone else praises him, you also feel angry. You don’t want to hear
how good your enemy is. When you are full of anger, you can’t imagine
that someone you hate may have some virtuous qualities; even if they do
have some good qualities, you can never remember any of them. You can
only remember all the bad things. When you like somebody, even his
faults can be endearing – ‘harmless little faults.’

So recognise this in your own experience; observe the force of like and
dislike. Practising patience and kindness is a very useful and effective
instrument for dealing with all the petty trivia which the mind builds
up around unpleasant experience. Mettā is also a very useful method for
those who have discriminative, very critical minds. They can see only
the faults in everything, but they never look at themselves, they only
see what’s ‘out there.’

It is now very common to always be complaining about the weather or the
government. Personal arrogance gives rise to these really nasty comments
about everything; or you start talking about someone who isn’t there,
ripping them apart, quite intelligently, and quite objectively. You are
so analytical, you know exactly what that person needs, what they should
do and what they should not do, and why they’re this way and that. Very
impressive to have such a sharp, critical mind and know what they ought
to do. You are, of course, saying, ‘Really, I’m much better than they
are.’

But with mettā, you are not blinding yourself to the faults and flaws in
everything. You are just peacefully co-existing with them. You are not
demanding that it be otherwise. So mettā sometimes needs to overlook
what’s wrong with yourself and everyone else – it doesn’t mean that you
don’t notice those things, it means that you don’t develop problems
around them. You stop that kind of indulgence by being kind and patient
– peacefully co-existing.
